# Political Legitimacy

Can a government ever be legitimate? An interesting question but before it can be answered, we must first ask from where is legitimacy derived.

Once, legitimacy was derived from God.  For the ancient Egyptians, their Pharaoh was a God.  4000 years later, European monarchs invoked the divine right of kings to legitimate their absolute rule.  A few centuries later, the Enlightenment witnessed the rise of rational justifications for legitimacy.  Governments claimed their legitimacy via two primary means - consent of the people and/or good outcomes.  Good outcomes are important - any government that consistently created poor outcomes for its people would be hard pressed to claim legitimacy - but consequences are not sufficient.  If they were, fascism and totalitarianism would be legitimate forms of government provided they delivered superior results for enough people.

It seems then, that the only legitimate government is one that the people consent to.  John Locke for example, held that consent to the government was given by simply residing under its jurisdiction.  But consent implies choice and if you have no where else to go, then your remaining can hardly be considered as consent.

Modern democracies claim consent through the ballot box. Voting is an explicit process and the more people who vote for a government, the more they can claim a legitimate mandate. But again the problem of choice arises.  Why should my voting for party X be considered as my consent to party X governing.  Perhaps I am merely stating my preference for party X over Y, or that party X is the best of a bad bunch none of whom I want.  Voting, especially infrequent voting, seems to be only a loose proxy of consent.

Ignoring the voting problem for a moment, even in a democracy it remains almost impossible to gain consent from all people on every issue.  To do so would require unlimited resources and us to all have identical preferences which is clearly not the case.  The best we could hope for then is to have consent to the process for which we will solve disagreements - our laws, constitution and other rules of the game.  Yet even then, universal consent about the rules may not be possible.

It seems then, that no government can ever claim legitimacy.  If political authority is the moral right to coerce, then the only legitimate authority is that to which we consent.  Political authority may be morally justified without being legitimate, but only legitimate authority generates political obligations.

In this sense, true democracy is a utopian ideal.  While political authority that fails to meet this ideal may never be legitimate, governments are still justifiable if they represent the closest manifestation of that idea.  As Winston Churchill noted, democracy is the worst form of government except all the others we have tried.  That’s fine when it is better, but if our currently government is no longer the ‘least worst’ form of government, it looses its justification.
